NavigationView FooterMenu Spec (#79)
microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml-specs: active/NavigationView/BottomItems/BottomMenuItems.md

Although an app developer can place any content into PaneFooter, including other NavigationViewItems, this content will not participate in the selection model and animations of the primary navigation list and Settings item.

_Open question:_ Should PaneFooter be deprecated because this new API is a direct replacement?

Some apps may choose to visually group navigation items into top-aligned and bottom-aligned lists.
While this grouping is possible today using navigation view's [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) property, the approach has interaction downsides that this feature will correct.

![NavigationView in Left display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Left.png)

![NavigationView in Top display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Top.png)

> By adding FooterMenuItems, we'll unify the [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3) with other navigation items in its immediate proximity.

Author: Yeah, I think it would be useful to expand on this. Unifying with the settings item means that the menu items that you specify to be in the footermenu (bottom menu items) will be formed into their own list with the settings item, apart from the list of top menu items. 

As you can see in the keyboarding section, the narrator will read bottom menu items (including the settings item) as members of its own list, separately indexed from the top menu items. In addition to that, they will be unified visually with the rest of the navigationview - bottom items will now participate in the same selection model and animations as the rest of the menu items (top & bottom). 

Does that make sense? I'll work on clarifying this section a bit.

_Open question:_ Should PaneFooter be deprecated because this new API is a direct replacement?

Some apps may choose to visually group navigation items into top-aligned and bottom-aligned lists.
While this grouping is possible today using navigation view's [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) property, the approach has interaction downsides that this feature will correct.

![NavigationView in Left display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Left.png)

![NavigationView in Top display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Top.png)

By adding FooterMenuItems, we'll unify the [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3) with other navigation items in its immediate proximity. The menu items that appear at the top or left of the NavigationView will be a part of their own list, and the bottom or right menu items will be a part of their own list, including the Settings item. 

> As a result, keyboard and Narrator users will feel that the footer list behavior meets their expectations - narrators will smoothly move from list to list, but specify that the lists are separate.

Reviewer: We shouldn't discuss Narrator in particular, it affects any Assistive Technology tool. I would just say "accessibility" rather than "Narrator" everywhere.

Author: Will update.

The primary purpose of these items is to be a list of navigation links within the app that hosts NavigationView, likely as a root element.
This navigation list is top aligned when NavigationView is shown in one of its left [display modes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview#display-modes), and left aligned when NavigationView is in its top [display mode](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview#display-modes). See NavigationView diagram below for reference:

![NavigationView with labels](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/images/leftnav-anatomy.png)

NavigationView provides a built-in [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3), which is always positioned at the bottom or right of the Pane, and a [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) area that positions content just before (either above or to the left) of the Settings item.

> Although an app developer can place any content into PaneFooter, including other NavigationViewItems, this content will not participate in the selection model and animations of the primary navigation list and Settings item.

Author: Yes exactly, PaneFooter looks like it was created to display things like account info, or a bank account balance. The items within a PaneFooter can't be selected.

_Open question:_ Should PaneFooter be deprecated because this new API is a direct replacement?

Some apps may choose to visually group navigation items into top-aligned and bottom-aligned lists.
While this grouping is possible today using navigation view's [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) property, the approach has interaction downsides that this feature will correct.

![NavigationView in Left display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Left.png)

![NavigationView in Top display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Top.png)

> By adding FooterMenuItems, we'll unify the [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3) with other navigation items in its immediate proximity. The menu items that appear at the top or left of the NavigationView will be a part of their own list, and the bottom or right menu items will be a part of their own list, including the Settings item. 

Author: Yes - I can try to clarify as it's a bit confusing. The footer menu list and the top list will technically be separate lists. The only place where this difference matters to a user AFAIK is with narrator. If there's three menu items at the top and two menu items at the bottom (one of which is settings), the narrator will read each top item as "x of 3" and each bottom item as "x of 2". 

However, there is only SelectionModel for the entire navigation view - only one item can be selected at a time from _all_ of the items (top and footer combined). This is how they behave as one list.

> By adding FooterMenuItems, we'll unify the [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3) with other navigation items in its immediate proximity. The menu items that appear at the top or left of the NavigationView will be a part of their own list, and the bottom or right menu items will be a part of their own list, including the Settings item. 

Author: Yes - I can try to clarify as it's a bit confusing. The footer menu list and the top list will technically be separate lists. The only place where this difference matters to a user AFAIK is with narrator. If there's three menu items at the top and two menu items at the bottom (one of which is settings), the narrator will read each top item as "x of 3" and each bottom item as "x of 2".

However, there is only SelectionModel for the entire navigation view - only one item can be selected at a time from all of the items (top and footer combined). This is how they behave as one list.

As a result, keyboard and assistive technology users will feel that the footer list behavior meets their expectations -  the top and bottom menu items will be specified as two separate lists, but it will be smooth to navigate from one to the other. See more in Accessibility section below.
Selection behavior and animations will also feel better integrated into the whole NavigationView control, as bottom menu items will participate in the same selection model as top menu items. 

# Description 
<!-- Use this section to provide a brief description of the feature.
For an example, see the introduction to the PasswordBox control 
(http://docs.microsoft.com/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/password-box). -->

FooterMenuItems is a list of navigation items similar to the MenuItems list.
FooterMenuItems allows apps to visually group their navigation items into top-aligned and bottom-aligned or left-aligned and right-aligned groups. 

> The default Settings item will be included as the last item in the FooterMenuItems collection. As a result, adding items into FooterMenuItems will by default display them before the Settings item. The Settings item can still be toggled using the `IsSettingsVisible` property.

Author: That's a good point, thanks for bringing it up. I think the original idea was to have the Settings item be a part of the FooterMenu collection. However, this would force us to change the logic behind how we toggle the Settings item's visibility (it would no longer be detached). 

You're correct that today Settings item is detached - it shows up in SelectedItem but not MenuItems, which is why we'd have to change things up with toggling its visibility as I just mentioned.

It would not be ideal for Settings to be able to be removed from the FooterMenu collection, but I'm not sure the best place to put it if we want to keep the grouping of settings + other footer menu items in terms of them being and behaving as one list.

@ojhad and @MikeHillberg let me know if you have opinions on this dilemma.

> The default Settings item will be included as the last item in the FooterMenuItems collection. As a result, adding items into FooterMenuItems will by default display them before the Settings item. The Settings item can still be toggled using the `IsSettingsVisible` property.

Author: Making the decision to include the settings item as a member of the FooterMenu collection. It makes more sense for the overall design of the control, and although one will be able to remove it manually from the collection, it doesn't break anything or change any other functionality.

> By unifying bottom-or-left-aligned navigation items with the Settings item, these items will now be a part of selection, keyboarding, and narrator behavior that applies to the rest of the NavigationView.

Author: Yep, I'll fix this.

# Background

> Today, [NavigationView](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview) provides a place in its [Pane](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview) to show any number of items.

Reviewer: Do we have an Anatomy of a NavigationView picture somewhere? (Picture of the control with labels pointing out the parts.)

Author: I haven't seen any out there, but @YuliKl would know for sure. I can create one if needed.

Reviewer: [This](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/images/leftnav-anatomy.png) look appropriate?

Author: Sorry, I should have known that one was out there. I can add that to this section for some context.

The primary purpose of these items is to be a list of navigation links within the app that hosts NavigationView, likely as a root element.
This navigation list is top aligned when NavigationView is shown in one of its left [display modes](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview#display-modes), and left aligned when NavigationView is in its top [display mode](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/navigationview#display-modes).
NavigationView provides a built-in [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3), which is always positioned at the bottom or right of the Pane, and a [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) area that positions content just before (either above or to the left) of the Settings item.
Although an app developer can place any content into PaneFooter, including other NavigationViewItems, this content will not participate in the selection model and animations of the primary navigation list and Settings item.

> _Open question:_ Should PaneFooter be deprecated because this new API is a direct replacement?

Reviewer: What happens if you use the old API?

Author: It's my understanding that if you add items to PaneFooter, they align to the bottom of the NavigationView but don't take part in the selection model - they cant be selected, and they aren't "counted" as items in the nav view, i.e. they don't have indices when navigating via keyboard. They do not raise ItemInvoked events when clicked on.

@ojhad can correct me if I'm wrong here.

Reviewer: I just wanted to make sure that if you continue to use the footer that it won't regress with this change.

Reviewer 2: That is correct. All `PaneFooter` does is display whatever gets passed into the property with no inherent behavioral expectations from NavigationView.

Functionality wise, I don't see this update regressing any existing implementation. However, we may need to think about the placement of the `PaneFooter` content in the pane relative to the footer list.

> # Description

Reviewer: This section is really more Background, not text that will show up in DMC. (So the text is good, but the header could be deleted.)

<!-- Use this section to provide a brief description of the feature.
For an example, see the introduction to the PasswordBox control 
(http://docs.microsoft.com/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/password-box). -->
Some apps may choose to visually group navigation items into top-aligned and bottom-aligned lists.
While this grouping is possible today using navigation view's [PaneFooter](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.panefooter?view=winui-2.3) property, the approach has interaction downsides that this feature will correct.

![NavigationView in Left display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Left.png)

![NavigationView in Top display mode showing FooterMenuItems](FooterItems_Top.png)

By adding FooterMenuItems, we'll unify the [Settings item](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.settingsitem?view=winui-2.3) with other navigation items in its immediate proximity.
As a result, keyboard and Narrator users will feel that the footer list behavior meets their expectations.
Selection behavior and animations will also feel better integrated into the whole NavigationView control.

> # Examples

Reviewer: Show a picture?

Author: Don't think we have access to a real screenshot yet, but I will work on getting a mockup in here.

<!-- As an example of this section, see the Examples section for the PasswordBox control 
(https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/password-box#examples). -->

## Add footer menu items in markup
```xaml
    <muxc:NavigationView>
        <muxc:NavigationView.MenuItems>
            <muxc:NavigationViewItem Icon="Save" Content="main1"/>
            <muxc:NavigationViewItem Icon="Play" Content="main2"/>
        </muxc:NavigationView.MenuItems>
        <muxc:NavigationView.FooterMenuItems>
            <muxc:NavigationViewItem Icon="Calculator" Content="bottom1" Padding="0,0,12,0"/>
            <muxc:NavigationViewItem Icon="Calendar" Content="bottom2" Padding="0,0,12,0"/>
        </muxc:NavigationView.FooterMenuItems>
        
    </muxc:NavigationView>
```

# Remarks
<!-- Explanation and guidance that doesn't fit into the Examples section. -->

<!-- APIs should only throw exceptions in exceptional conditions; basically,
only when there's a bug in the caller, such as argument exception.  But if for some
reason it's necessary for a caller to catch an exception from an API, call that
out with an explanation either here or in the Examples -->

> FooterMenuItems is a list of navigation items similar to the existing MenuItems list.

Reviewer: The DMC text shouldn't be a delta:

```suggestion
FooterMenuItems is a list of navigation items similar to the MenuItems list.
```

The default Settings item will be included as the last item in the FooterMenuItems collection.

> As a result, adding items into FooterMenuItems will by default display them before the Settings item. The Settings item will still be able to be toggled using the `IsSettingsVisible` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, adding items into FooterMenuItems will by default display them before the Settings item. The Settings item can still be toggled using the `IsSettingsVisible` property.
```

> ## Selection

Reviewer: This section is all implementation detail? It can go into the Appendix then.

When users invoke a navigation item, that item will become selected and show its selection indicator. 

> At most one navigation item will be selected at a given time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At most one navigation item can be selected at a given time.
```

> The selection indicator will animate smoothly between items in the MenuItems list and FooterMenuItems list including Settings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The selection indicator will animate smoothly between items in the MenuItems list and FooterMenuItems list including the optional built-in Settings menu item. 
```

In order to achieve consistent animations and allow for only one navigation item to be selected at a time, all navigation items should be in the same selection model. To achieve this, a large collection that consists of two smaller collections (specifically FooterMenuItems and MenuItems) will be used as the source.

> ## Narrator

Reviewer: This can be either Background or Appendix.

- Home does nothing
- End moves focus to settings

If keyboard focus is on Settings:
- Up arrow moves focus to Bottom 2
- Down arrow does nothing (same as today)
- Tab moves focus to a Header or Content item (same as today).
- Home moves focus to Bottom 1
- End does nothing

# API Notes
<!-- Option 1: Give a one or two line description of each API (type
and member), or at least the ones that aren't obvious
from their name.  These descriptions are what show up
in IntelliSense. For properties, specify the default value of the property if it
isn't the type's default (for example an int-typed property that doesn't default to zero.) -->

<!-- Option 2: Put these descriptions in the below API Details section,
with a "///" comment above the member or type. -->

`public IList<object> FooterMenuItems { get; }`

Gets the list of objects to be used as navigation items in the footer menu.

`public object FooterMenuItemsSource { get; set; }`

Sets or gets the object that represents the navigation items to be used in the footer menu.

# API Details
<!-- The exact API, in MIDL3 format (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/midl-3/) -->
```c++

> [WUXC_VERSION_RS3]

Reviewer: Could you delete all these "WUXC" attributes, they're not really part of the API

[webhosthidden]
[WUXC_INTERFACE_NAME("INavigationView", f209ce15-391a-42ca-9fc6-f79da65aca32)]
[WUXC_STATIC_NAME("INavigationViewStatics", 363a86c7-72da-4420-b871-15d9d0d45756)]
[WUXC_CONSTRUCTOR_NAME("INavigationViewFactory", e50687c1-b7c2-4975-ad7a-5f4fe6a514c9)]
[MUX_PROPERTY_CHANGED_CALLBACK(TRUE)]
[MUX_PROPERTY_CHANGED_CALLBACK_METHODNAME("OnPropertyChanged")]
unsealed runtimeclass NavigationView : Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.ContentControl
{

>     [WUXC_VERSION_PREVIEW]

Reviewer: We don't need this either.
